Blurb::
Set mutation offset to use a uniform distribution
Description::
The \c mutation_type controls what approach is employed in randomly
modifying continuous design variables within the EA population.  Each
of the mutation methods generates coordinate-wise changes to
individuals, usually by adding a random variable to a given coordinate
value (an "offset" mutation), but also by replacing a given coordinate
value with a random variable (a "replace" mutation).  Discrete design
variables are always mutated using the \c offset_uniform method. The
\c mutation_rate controls the probability of mutation being performed
on an individual, both for new individuals generated by crossover (if
crossover occurs) and for individuals from the existing population.
It is the fraction of trial points that are mutated in a given
iteration and therefore must be specified to be between 0 and 1.  When
mutation is performed, all dimensions of each individual are mutated.
The \c mutation_scale specifies a scale factor which scales continuous
mutation offsets; this is a fraction of the total range of each
dimension, so \c mutation_scale is a relative value between 0 and 1.
The \c mutation_range is used to control \c offset_uniform mutation
used for discrete parameters.  The replacement discrete value is the
original value plus or minus an integer value up to \c mutation_range.
The \c offset_normal, \c offset_cauchy, and \c offset_uniform mutation
types are "offset" mutations in that they add a 0-mean random variable
with a normal, cauchy, or uniform distribution, respectively, to the
existing coordinate value.  These offsets are limited in magnitude by
\c mutation_scale.  The \c replace_uniform mutation type is not
limited by \c mutation_scale; rather it generates a replacement value
for a coordinate using a uniformly distributed value over the total
range for that coordinate.

Topics::
Examples::
Theory::
Faq::
See_Also::	
