Blurb::
Select a mutation type for JEGA methods
Description::
There are five mutation types allowed. \c replace_uniform introduces
random variation by first randomly choosing a design variable of a
randomly selected design and reassigning it to a random valid value
for that variable. No consideration of the current value is given when
determining the new value. All mutation types have a \c
mutation_rate. The number of mutations for the replace_uniform mutator
is the product of the mutation_rate and the population_size.

The \c bit_random mutator introduces random variation by first
converting a randomly chosen variable of a randomly chosen design into
a binary string. It then flips a randomly chosen bit in the string
from a 1 to a 0 or visa versa. In this mutation scheme, the resulting
value has more probability of being similar to the original value. The
number of mutations performed is the product of the mutation_rate, the
number of design variables, and the population size.

The offset mutators all act by adding an "offset" random amount to a
variable value. The random amount has a mean of zero in all cases. The
\c offset_normal mutator introduces random variation by adding a
Gaussian random amount to a variable value. The random amount has a
standard deviation dependent on the \c mutation_scale. The \c
mutation_scale is a fraction in the range [0, 1] and is meant to help
control the amount of variation that takes place when a variable is
mutated. \c mutation_scale is multiplied by the range of the variable
being mutated to serve as standard deviation. \c offset_cauchy is
similar to \c offset_normal, except that a Cauchy random variable is
added to the variable being mutated. The \c mutation_scale also
defines the standard deviation for this mutator.  Finally, \c
offset_uniform adds a uniform random amount to the variable value. For
the \c offset_uniform mutator, the \c mutation_scale is interpreted as
a fraction of the total range of the variable. The range of possible
deviation amounts is +/- 1/2 * (\c mutation_scale * variable
range). The number of mutations for all offset mutators is defined as
the product of \c mutation_rate and \c population_size.

Topics::
Examples::
Theory::
Faq::
See_Also::	
