Blurb::
Description::
Hierarchical approximations use corrected results from a low fidelity
model as an approximation to the results of a high fidelity "truth"
model. These approximations are also known as model hierarchy,
multifidelity, variable fidelity, and variable complexity
approximations. The required \c low_fidelity_model_pointer
specification points to the low fidelity model specification. This
model is used to generate low fidelity responses which are then
corrected and returned to an iterator. The required \c
high_fidelity_model_pointer specification points to the specification
for the high fidelity truth model. This model is used only for
verifying low fidelity results and updating low fidelity corrections.
The \c correction specification specifies which correction technique
will be applied to the low fidelity results in order to match the high
fidelity results at one or more points. In the hierarchical case (as
compared to the global case), the \c correction specification is
required, since the omission of a correction technique would
effectively eliminate the purpose of the high fidelity model. If it
is desired to use a low fidelity model without corrections, then a
hierarchical approximation is not needed and a \c single model should
be used. Refer to \ref model-surrogate-global for additional information on
available correction approaches.


Topics::	not_yet_reviewed
Examples::
Theory::

<b> Multifidelity Surrogates </b>: Multifidelity modeling involves the
use of a low-fidelity physics-based model as a surrogate for the
original high-fidelity model. The low-fidelity model typically
involves a coarser mesh, looser convergence tolerances, reduced
element order, or omitted physics. It is a separate model in its own
right and does not require data from the high-fidelity model for
construction. Rather, the primary need for high-fidelity evaluations
is for defining correction functions that are applied to the
low-fidelity results.



Faq::
See_Also::	model-surrogate-global, model-surrogate-local, model-surrogate-multipoint
