Blurb::
Add context to data: measurement or observation error
Description::
We have the capability for the user to specify different
values for the experimental error, i.e., measurement or observation
error in the \c calibration_data_file. The keyword \c
num_std_deviations specifies this. If \c num_std_deviations = 0, the
user does not specify any experimental error terms in the \c
calibration_data_file, only the actual observations are specified. If
the user specifies \c num_std_deviations equal to the number of
calibration terms, then each row of a freeform \c
calibration_data_file must contain two times \c calibration_terms.
The first \c calibration_terms columns are the experimental data, and
the second \c calibration_terms columns are the experimental standard
deviations. For example, if the user has three \c calibration terms,
and specifies \c num_std_deviations = 3, then the calibration data
must contain six columns. The first three columns will contain the
data, and the second three columns will contain the experimental error
for the data in the first three columns. Finally, if the user
specifies \c num_std_deviations = 1, the same value of the standard
deviations will be used for all of the calibration terms. In the
example given above, with three calibration terms, if \c
num_std_deviations = 1, the there would be four columns in the \c
calibration_data_file, and the fourth column would contain the
standard deviation that would be applied to all three calibration
columns. Note that the standard deviations are given in units of a
standard deviation or sigma term, not a variance term. These standard
deviations are used to weight the residuals in the sum-of-squares
objective.
Topics::	not_yet_reviewed
Examples::
Theory::
Faq::
See_Also::	
