The directory Dakota/examples is designed to help users get started
using DAKOTA.  The examples are grouped into the following directories:

examples/tutorial: Introductory examples corresponding to Chapter 2 in
the DAKOTA User's Manual (DAKOTA Tutorial).  These input files
demonstrate application of various DAKOTA methods to simple analytic
functions via both direct and system/fork interfaces to simulators.

examples/methods: More in-depth examples of performing specific
studies with various DAKOTA methods, including uncertainty
quantification, least squares (calibration), and optimization.  Also
advanced examples such as optimization under uncertainty, second-order
probability, and surrogate-based optimization.  Most User's Manual
examples from Chapter 3 onward are included here.

examples/script_interfaces: Examples of linking DAKOTA to various
applications.  Of particular note is script_interfaces/generic/ which
contains a demonstration of linking DAKOTA to a mock finite element
analysis code through a black-box interface, as detailed in Chapter 16
of the DAKOTA User's Manual (Advanced Simulation Code Interfaces).
Here dprepro/aprepro is used to insert DAKOTA parameters into the
simulation input file, the simulation is run, and results are
extracted for return to DAKOTA.  Includes both finite-difference and
analytic gradients.

examples/linked_interfaces: Guidance for directly
linking/close-coupling with or embedding DAKOTA with other software
tools.  This directory will grow to include examples of DAKOTA's
"library mode" API, DLL service, ModelCenter, etc.

examples/parallelism: A range of DAKOTA + application parallelism
examples from massively serial (embarrassingly parallel) to parallel
evaluations of a parallel analysis code.

examples/platforms: Platform-specific guidance for getting started
with DAKOTA, including potentially helpful compilation and run-time
options.
