Blurb::
DIviding RECTangles  method
Description::
North Carolina State University (NCSU) has an implementation of the
DIRECT algorithm (DIviding RECTangles algorithm that is outlined in
the SCOLIB method section above).  This version is documented in [\ref
Gablonsky2001 "Gablonsky, 2001".]  We have found that the NCSU DIRECT
implementation works better and is more robust for some problems than
\c coliny_direct.  Currently, we maintain both versions of DIRECT in
%Dakota; in the future, we may deprecate one.  The NCSU DIRECT method
is selected with \c ncsu_direct.  We have tried to maintain
consistency between the keywords in SCOLIB and NCSU implementation of
DIRECT, but the algorithms have different parameters, so the keywords
sometimes have slightly different meaning.

The method independent controls for \c max_iterations and \c
max_function_evaluations limit the number of iterations and the number
of function evaluations that can be performed during an NCSU DIRECT
optimization.  This methods will always strictly respect the number of
iterations, but may slightly exceed the number of function
evaluations, as it will always explore all sub-rectangles at the
current level.

There are four specification controls affecting NCSU DIRECT: \c
solution_target, \c convergence_tolerance, \c min_boxsize_limit, and
\c volume_boxsize_limit.  The solution target specifies a goal toward
which the optimizer should track.  When \c solution_target is
specified, \c convergence_tolerance specifies a percent error on the
optimization.  This is used for test problems, when the true global
minimum is known (call it \c solution_target := fglobal).  Then, the
optimization terminates when 100(f_min-fglobal)/max(1,abs(fglobal) <
convergence_tolerance.  The default for fglobal is -1.0e100 and the
default for convergence tolerance is as given above.

\c min_boxsize_limit is a setting that terminates the optimization
when the measure of a hyperrectangle S with f(c(S)) = fmin is less
than min_boxsize_limit.  \c volume_boxsize_limit is a setting that
terminates the optimization when the volume of a hyperrectangle S with
f(c(S)) = fmin is less than volume_boxsize_limit percent of the
original hyperrectangle.  Basically, volume_boxsize_limit stops the
optimization when the volume of the particular rectangle which has
fmin is less than a certain percentage of the whole volume.  \c
min_boxsize_limit uses an arbitrary measure to stop the optimization.


Topics::	direct, not_yet_reviewed
Examples::
Theory::
Faq::
See_Also::	method-coliny_direct
