Blurb::
Parameter study
Description::
Dakota's vector parameter study computes response data sets at
selected intervals along a vector in parameter space. It is often used
for single-coordinate parameter studies (to study the effect of a
single variable on a response set), but it can be used more generally
for multiple coordinate vector studies (to investigate the response
variations along some n-dimensional vector such as an optimizer search
direction). This study is selected using the \c vector_parameter_study
specification followed by either a \c final_point or a \c step_vector
specification.

The vector for the study can be defined in several ways (refer to
dakota.input.summary). First, a \c final_point specification, when
combined with the initial values from the variables specification (in
\ref VarCommands, see \c initial_point and \c initial_state for design
and state variables as well as inferred initial values for uncertain
variables), uniquely defines an n-dimensional vector's direction and
magnitude through its start and end points. The values included in the
\c final_point specification are the actual variable values for
discrete sets, not the underlying set index value.  The intervals
along this vector are then specified with a \c num_steps
specification, for which the distance between the initial values and
the \c final_point is broken into \c num_steps intervals of equal
length.  For continuous and discrete range variables, distance is
measured in the actual values of the variables, but for discrete set
variables (either integer or real sets for design, uncertain, or state
types), distance is instead measured in index offsets.  Since discrete
sets may have nonuniform offsets in their enumerated set values but
have uniform offsets in their index values, defining steps in terms of
set indices allows for meaningful parameter study specifications for
these variable types.  This study performs function evaluations at
both ends, making the total number of evaluations equal to \c
num_steps+1.  The study has stringent requirements on performing
appropriate steps with any discrete range and discrete set variables.
A \c num_steps specification must result in discrete range and set
index steps that are integral: no remainder is currently permitted in
the integer step calculation and no rounding to integer steps will
occur. 

The other technique for defining a vector in the study is the \c
step_vector specification. This parameter study begins at the initial
values and adds the increments specified in \c step_vector to obtain
new simulation points. For discrete set types (design, uncertain, or
state; real or integer), the steps are set index offsets, not steps
between the actual set values.  This increment process is performed \c
num_steps times, and since the initial values are included, the total
number of simulations is again equal to \c num_steps+1. 

Topics::	parameter_study, not_yet_reviewed
Examples::
Theory::
Faq::
