Blurb::
Add context to data: number of different experiments
Description::
A more advanced use of the \c calibration_data_file might specify \c
num_experiments \f$ N_E \f$ and \c num_replicates \f$ N_R \f$,
indicating that there are multiple experiments, each with 1 or more
replicates to inform each residual term. When multiple experiments or
replicates are present, %Dakota will expand the number of residuals
for the repeat measurement data and difference with the data
accordingly. For example, if the user has one experiment but five
replicates were taken, in the example above with three calibration
terms, the \c calibration_data_file would need to contain five rows
(one for each replicate), and each row should contain three
experimental data values that will be differenced with respect to the
appropriate model response. In this example, \f$ N_E = 1 \f$, and \f$
N_R = 5\f$. One can have varying numbers of experiments and
replicates, such as two experiments, one with 3 replicates and one
with 7 replicates. In this example, \c num_experiments = 2, and the
number of replicates would be given as an integer vector: \c
num_replicates = 3 7. In this example, there would be a total of 10
rows of data in the experimental data file. To summarize, %Dakota
will calculate the sum of the squared residuals as: \f[f =
\sum_{i=1}^{N_E}\sum_{j=1}^{{N_R}_i}R_{i,j}^2\f] where the residuals
now are calculated as: \f[R_{i,j} = y^M_i - y^O_{i,j}. \f]

Topics::	not_yet_reviewed
Examples::
Theory::
Faq::
See_Also::	
